This is an interview with Mrs. Bertha Moore by
Larry W. Cruz on April 15, 1976,
at the LaSalle Retirement Home at the corner of
West 27th at Main in Bryan, Texas.
So tell me a little bit more about Japan. Well,
uh... I was born, you want me to tell you when I was
born? Yeah, tell it, when you were born. I was born
at about two miles, I used to say I discovered
America, about two miles northeast of Bryan in a
little neighborhood they called Woodville. And
we moved to Bryan and moved into a, it was kind of
like a mining town hotel. was just across the
street west of the First National Bank. And it was a
two-story outfit. One night, one fellow,
somebody was climbing the post to get free
lodging, you know. But we got, my father, mother
got out, and they got him. He come on through, and we
seen him back downstairs, you know. And we had...
Well, the room and board was very cheap, if I
remember correctly. It was $20 a month, you know,
for room and board. We didn't stay there very long.
And one thing about our family, we have lived on
Bryan Street ever since we've been in Bryan.
Really? When we first moved to town, we moved to
this hotel. And then we gave it, when we wanted to
get away from the hotel business, So we moved north
on Bryan Street at a little place. The old man had a
cabinet shop in the corner of the yard. And we
children spent most of our time in the cabinet
shop. And he let us use all of his tools and
everything. Then my father bought a house across
the street. Dr. Hall lived there. And he sold his
house and moved into Bryan, further into Bryan.
And we bought that house. And then when we got rid of
that house, we moved to South Bryan, 700 South
Bryan. It's in the house right next door to the
woman's old building, the woman's club old
building there. And then when Mr. Moore and I were
married, we lived across the street here from the
Missouri Pacific Depot. Yeah, I know where that
is. And now I'm in the hotel, and the back end of the
hotel is on Bryan Street. Oh, golly. I've lived on
Bryan Street ever since I've been in Bryan. What
did your father do? He was a cotton warehouse man.
He worked in what was known as Bryan Brick
Warehouse, and it was down here right where? Now,
what building is there? part of it faced on Main
Street. I forget what's there now. But he worked
there. That's one reason we moved to town, because
he had to come into town to work, you know. And then
now there's another one. So he worked there.
That's the main thing he did. He kind of got into
some insurance business, but he didn't stay
there. But his main business was the warehouse.
And they had a wagon yard attached to the
warehouse. And the men who brought the cotton in
just camped there that night, you know, and then
left the next morning going home. And we had a
warehouse down there. Then the parker, Mr. Sam
Parker had a warehouse down on North Main Street. A
fellow, an Italian, came in one day. I was driving
for a mule team and loaded with cotton, you know,
the wagons loaded with cotton. And I met the
attendant there and said, and what's your name?
And for instance, he said, well, Tony Scaniato or
some kind of Italian name. And came in the next few
days, and he had another big wagon load. This time
he had a six-mule team. And he says, and what's your
name? And he told him again what his name was. Came
in the next week, had a big wagon load of cotton, and
he says, and what's your name? He said, seemed like
it was yesterday.
But Father did, he had, he was, we, my folks were the
first people Among the first Presbyterian
membership here, they came from a little place out
here north of Ryan called Concord. And my father
was superintendent of the Sunday school for 25
years. And when he retired, they gave him a family
Bible, a great big family Bible. And the
Presbyterian church is down here where the city
hall is now. And it faced west. It was like The
church was just like a big white country church,
you know, and had two front doors and an entrance
hall, and of course had the steeple and the bell.
But the Galveston storm blew the steeple off and
the bell fell. But they still have the bell. It's
stored in somewhere. But we've had two churches
now, and they haven't put the bell up yet. There are
a lot of Presbyterians around here in the area? Oh,
yeah. We have a nice congregation. We have a
beautiful church now. I worked in the church and
did everything from sweeping the floors to
teaching a Sunday school class.
As I say, I don't know dates. Oh, that doesn't make
any difference. You said about the Galveston
storm blew down the bell? Oh, yeah. It blew the
steeple. They never did put the steeple back on.
And what was the question you made? I've heard
about the storm. Was that the one that just flooded
the whole island or something like that? Well,
now, you know, Carla, yes, that was the one that
was, yeah. We had a great big book about this long
and about that wide. And it was, when I had to move up
here, everything got lost, you know. But we had
that garrison storm portrayed from one end to the
other. The convents were boomed, were drowned
out, you know, and everything.
But Carla did a lot of damage, but that's more
recent, you know. What about something more about
your brothers and sisters? How many brothers and
how many sisters did you have? There was eleven
children in the family. We had five boys and six
girls.
I don't want this to go on tape.
We lived family style. And we all worked together.
We had a big garden spot. We had three cows. Now, we
were living in town. There was not very many
ordinances then. We had three cows. And we had a
small peat pen off to one side. And we had a long
grape arbor in the garden with grapes just hung
like that. And we all had a wonderful, wonderful
garden. We lived at home. Well,
we would kill. We didn't have ice boxes to keep the
meats in. We would salt it down. It was put down in
brine, and some of the meats we took out was just
real good breakfast bacon, you know. My father had
a good preservative recipe, you know. It was salt,
peat, and sugar, and I don't know what all,
something. But we lived at home, and we just didn't
have much money, but We had a nice home to live in.
That's the main thing, yeah. Well, what about, you
said you came from a school of hard knocks. Any way
back before that? Well, I mean that, what I mean is
that we didn't have any money for us to have a
college education. Yeah, what about your
elementary or education? Well, I went to our
school, had ten grades, and I went through the
ninth grade. But there was a private school here
and my sister just younger than I, Mrs. Tina
Johnson, who passed away a couple of weeks ago, she
and I were living in walking distance of this
private school. It was kind of a college. And I had a
chance to get some botany, some trigonometry, and
things like that that I didn't get in the public
school. The superintendent of this little
college gave mother a chance to send the two of us at
a reduced price, you see. And we both graduated the
same year. Tinny was salutatorian and I was
valedictorian. We had three, what do you call it,
three grades. There was first prize, well not
first prize, What would it be? First notation? And
then I was second. I was second in the graduating
class. And in this school, we had debates. We had
public debates. And I liked it because we had the
botany and we had trigonometry. And then we had a
very good music teacher there, too, you see. So it
was really a nice place to go. And that, right now,
There's the Newman Printing Company on the
grounds. Oh, really? Uh-huh. It was a big
two-story house, white house, and it was called
the Masonic Hall. And when that was torn down, this
other building was put up there. I was glad that I
got this education. We only had reading, writing,
and arithmetic in high school. You said you had a
good music teacher? Did you play any instruments
or anything? Well, we had an elderly lady from
north, up north somewhere, but she was a good
instructress. But we had some,
what do you call the... When somebody has a
graduation, they have a special program. Oh,
yeah. Commencement? No, not a commencement. A
recital. A recital, yeah. Thank you for a word. We
had recitals that were very nice. We had a public
place where we had most all of our programs. It was
located down here where this... First National
Bank drive-in bank is, and it was called the Bryan
Opera House. It eventually burned, but we used to
have our debates. You see now you have it at the
schools and things, but we didn't have anything
like that when I was coming on. What did you usually
debate about? Just topics of the day? Well, the
biggest thing that, now let's see, was with regard
to the Russian, Japanese, and Russian issues. I
mean... They had a big war or something? Yeah, oh
yeah. That's when the Russian and Japanese were
fighting so badly. What was the real question? It
was...
There's a word in there that I can't get. Should
America join in or something like that? No.
Whether it was a good idea for them to be at, across
ways, you know. But anyhow, my side lost.
There was two boys and two girls.
But oh, I tell you, I did more reading. I could have
fought two or three battles if I'd have had a
chance. And then that school finally folded up.
The man died, the president died, and it folded up.
Anybody home? No, we're gone. In your social life,
you know, when you were growing up in school or
anything, did you have dances or whatever? Well, I
never did dance, I never did throw dice, and I never
did drink.
But still, you had a good time. But I had a real good
time, and I knew what I had. Yeah. And I had always
had a very pleasant situation. We had lots of
things that we attended. I don't know whether
people know anything about it today. Is that we had
hay rides, and we had play parties, and we had a heel
and toe dance a lot of times. And everybody seemed
to be in a congenial attitude, you know. So we
didn't have any, none of the things that they have
today. And so far as graduating at the College of
Hard Knocks, I had to get mine the best way I could.
And I have gotten most of my education from
observation. I've kept one eye open on all
corners. And we had... where we'd have recitals,
and we called them musicals more than anything.
And all I did was to go and listen because I didn't,
in fact I couldn't carry a tune in a sack, I don't
think. But we had always, and we had lots of parties
maybe a public place chaperoned by some fewer
ladies.
But we always had a very nice, mostly the weekends,
you know. The rest of the time was devoted to the
books. And I never did absorb much of them.
But now, my work has been volunteer work. I worked
at different places in town. I worked at the
telephone office, I worked at the drug store, and I
worked at... Were you a telephone operator? I was a
telephone operator for several years. Really
good many years. I
worked in the time when we cranked the bells,
cranked the switchboard. The manager of the
telephone company said, Well, since you've done
everything in the telephone company now, but
climb a pole.
But he would go out on the line, you know, and have a
test
phone with him and call in and pick up the trouble,
and I would be able to locate it on the switch on
the... The board back of the switchboard, you
know. But I worked at all places in the telephone
office, long distance and rural and local. One
lady called me one day and said, I'm going to cross
the street. I'm going to put the baby by the phone.
and take the receiver down, and if he cries, will
you call me? So I babysit it, too. Over the
telephone? Over the telephone. Golly. So that's
the way we lived in that day and time. You know,
there's a lot of contact. I don't think anybody
would do that now. But in my later years,
I have over 35 years with the Red Cross. what used to
be the Grey Ladies. We don't have the Grey Ladies
anymore. And counting the, and we worked, one lady
and I, Mrs. Lyons and I, went to Marlin and made
arrangements to work at the Marlin Veterans
Hospital. And I have had, I was one of the, well I was
the first one that got the 1,000 hour The pen for
1,000 hours of volunteer work. We have several who
have gotten those hours, too. We've had a good
group that has worked at Marlin every week. Four or
five go up and do what they call pilot service. And
they were the Red Cross gray ladies then, but now
they are the Brazos volunteer. Brazos area
volunteer group. This week. And she's one of them.
She went up to Marlin this week. And we work for the
day up there. We leave about 7 o'clock in the
morning and get back about 4. We got back about 10
minutes to 4. Did you? We generally made it in a long
time ago. We made it in about 5, but then between 4
and 5, you know. And so, and I have, since I've not
been able to participate physically, I've done
volunteer work. here. For instance, these things
I'm making. I work with the church.
My group at the church works with the indigent
people, you know, to a certain extent. And we make
something out of nothing. We take a man's shirt and
we cut the collar off and use the front part for a
baby gown. We put laced down the front part and at
the collar. We take a part of the tail of the shirt
and make the sleeves and put lace on that. And we
have that for the gown, or for the little gown you
might say. And we take the tail of the shirt and make
a diaper shirt out of it. And we'll take the, if it's
a long sleeve shirt, there's a bi-side and a
straight side to the sleeve. We'll sew that
together. and then we peek over the outside edge of
it and make a diaper. Then when we get ready to
dispose of them, we make what they call a lead. We
put in two or three of these gowns and the little
butterfly baby jackets and two or three dresses
and three or four dozen diapers.
Then we put that all in a package and take it to the
courthouse to this office where they dispose of
them. The people who get them, I think, are
screened. And they give them to some of them that
don't have things to start off with. So that's one
thing I do. This goes into that, too, you see. And I
have made, this is called a wheelchair lap robe.
Mm-hmm. I made 50 of those for the Marlin Hospital
in the time that I've been with them. And then I've
made 25 for friends. Some of them have a father in a
nursing home. And then I made my niece one and two or
three people in California. I've made some for a
lady who lives. She used to visit us. Her son was in
the Navy and she used to visit us. I made two for her.
And things like that, you know. But I put my hours in
the volunteer group because I still have my name on
the calendar, I mean on the list. I make myself
belong. I don't know whether I need to believe
that, but I just didn't want to give it up. So I stay
with them. I do do that. And in that work, I have I've
rejuvenated bedspreads, a lot of knitting work,
and our church knitted bandages for the
leprosarium over in Africa. And I've knitted 75
bandages. When we first started working with
them, Larry, we made them 50 inches long. They're
35 stitches on, 30 stitches on the needle. And we
made them 50 inches long. And then they went up to
72, then they went to 92, and now we have to do them 96
inches long. And you know that's a long way. But
we've had pictures from over there where they use
these bandages, and they can't use the AC bandages
because the rubbers deteriorate so badly, you
know. So they use these bandages, and they can use
them over and over. They take them off and wash
them, disinfect them, and use them again, you
know. But they couldn't do the AC bandage. I've
seen several dead AC bandages over there, but I
never have heard whether they used them or not.
They might use them for something else. But this
leprosarium, our church has been working, and I
think other churches in town, Worked with the
lepersoreum over there, too. But we do do that. You
know, you were talking about all your jobs and
everything. What about the transportation, you
know, to and from? Did you have an old car or a wagon
or a bugger or something? Well, when we had our
original, we walked. Yeah, that's the thing.
What'd you say, Willa Beth? We walked. Yeah, we
walked. Then maybe somebody, but I never did get a
ride to work, you know, the work that I did. But now
they have, in the group going to Marlin, one lady
takes her car and they, isn't it the group that goes
together and pays for the gas? We pay for our gas. We
pay for the gas. Now when we were gray ladies... The
Red Cross furnished the gas for us. They don't do it
anymore though now. We had a divorce. We'll have to
have a barbecue or something. Each member pays a
dollar a month, but if we don't have too many
members... We don't have near the... It gets
pretty high. We don't have near the members that we
used to have. What about... about your marriage
with Mr. Moore. Can you tell me more about what was
he like? Mr. Moore was, when I met him, he was, they
called them drummers in that day and time. He was a
salesman for an implement company out of Dallas.
And I worked with Parker Ashton Hardware Company.
And we had It looked like, well, it was several
years before we were married. But we were married
at home. And
we went to Mejia for a few days and came back. And he
was, at the time that I married him, he was agent for
the Seth Moring Plantation in the Brazos Abaddon,
in the Mudville area.
They had the house fixed up before we were married,
and we moved down there and lived in, oh, we stayed
down there quite a few years. I forget, maybe six,
eight years. And then he took over the Magnolia
Agency in Bryan, and we moved back to Bryan. And
that's when we moved over here across from the
depot. And he, we were married in 1915, and he died
in, I've been a widow three times as long as I was
married. I've had a hard fight with a short stick.
But I had one son who, if I do say it myself, he really
made his name in the military, in the Air Force. If
you could see some of the honors that were some of
the awards and things that he received. When did he
go into the Air Force? Beg your pardon? When did he
go into the Air Force? In, um, wait a minute. What
had I done? 41, I believe. 41? He tried to, look over
there and get that black book.
This book here? Yeah. That was a command, not an
entreaty.
He tried to get in up here. This has all been stored
away. I had to go to the hospital and they had to give
up my room here. All this has been stored away. So
it's in pretty bad shape.
This is where he was in school and he was king of
And
this is very... Now when he tried to get in here in
Bryan, they found he was colorblind. And he
couldn't get in. He went back to college and tried.
They had the recruiting office that was under the
grandstand down there. He didn't get in. But when
they heard this They were in Houston. He went to
Houston, but he got behind a boy who was just going
in. And he saw, he remembered what it was, you know.
But he never did, he would never, he never got into
officer's training, anything like that, because
he wouldn't go in. He said if they would throw a
green light or a red light, he wouldn't know which
is which. But he made master sergeant. And he was a
turret gunner. And he got an award in Italy and in
England. And when he was in the islands, he gave
blood for one of the main Rotarians down there. And
he was given quite a bit of publicity then. And
there's been so many awards. that you just can't
realize that he's done as many as he did. And he was
living in Tucson, Arizona when he was killed. He
was in Davis Month in the Air Force Base out there.
And... Sound like a real fine person? Well, you
know, everybody thinks our crew is the blackest.
Yeah. I know what you mean. Yeah. But he was... He
really was a wonderful...